good evening I'm Ruth Tyner Feld of the
League of Women Voters education fund
next Tuesday is election day before
going to the polls voters want to
understand the issues and know the
candidates positions tonight
voters will have an opportunity to see
and hear the major party candidates for
the presidency state their views on
issues that affect us all the League of
Women Voters is proud to present this
presidential debate our moderator is
Howard K Smith Thank You mrs. Heine Feld
the League of Women Voters is pleased to
welcome to the Cleveland Ohio Convention
Center Music Hall President Jimmy Carter
the Democratic Party's candidate for
re-election to the presidency and
governor Ronald Reagan of California the
Republican Party's candidate for the
presidency the candidates will debate
questions on domestic economic foreign
policy and national security issues the
questions are going to be posed by a
panel of distinguished journalists who
here with me
they are Marvin stone the editor of US
News and World Report
Harry Ellis national correspondent of
the Christian Science Monitor William
Hilliard assistant managing editor of
the Portland Oregonian Barbara Walters
correspondent ABC News the ground rules
for this is agreed by you gentlemen for
these each panelist down here will ask a
question the same question to each of
the two candidates after the two
candidates have answered a panelist will
ask follow-up questions to try to
sharpen the answers the candidates will
then have an opportunity each to to make
a rebuttal that will constitute the
first half of the debate and I will
state the rules for the
second half later on some other rules
the candidates are not permitted to
bring prepared notes to the podium but
are permitted to make notes during the
debate if the candidates exceed the
allotted time agreed on I will
reluctantly but certainly interrupts we
asked the Convention Center audience
here to abide by one ground rule please
do not applaud or express approval or
disapproval during the debate now based
on a toss of the coin governor Reagan
will respond to the first question from
Marvin stone governor as you're well
aware the question of war and peace has
emerged as a central issue in this
campaign and the give-and-take of recent
weeks President Carter's been criticized
for responding late to agressive Soviet
impulses for insufficient buildup of our
armed forces and a paralysis in dealing
with Afghanistan and Iran you have been
criticized for being all too quick to
advocate the use of lots of muscle
military action to deal with foreign
crises specifically what are the
differences between the two of you on
the uses of American military power I
don't know what the differences might be
because I don't know what mr. Carter's
policies are I do know what he has said
about mine and I'm only here to tell you
that I believe with all my heart that
our first priority must be world peace
and that use of force is always and only
a last resort when everything else has
failed and then only with regard to our
national security now I believe also
that this meeting this mission is
responsibility for preserving the peace
which I believe is a responsibility
peculiar to our country but we cannot
shirk our responsibility as the leader
of the free world because we're the only
one that can do it and therefore the
burden of maintaining the peace falls on
us and to maintain that peace requires a
strength
America has never gotten in a war
because we were too strong
we can get into a war by letting events
get out of hand as they have in the last
three and a half years under the foreign
policies of this administration of mr.
Carter's until we're faced each time
with the crisis and good management in
preserving the peace requires that we
control the events and try to intercept
before they become a crisis but I have
seen four wars in my lifetime I'm a
father of sons I have a grandson I don't
ever want to see another generation of
young Americans bleed their lives into
Sandy Beach heads in the Pacific or rice
paddies and jungles in the in Asia or
the muddy blood of bloody fields of
battlefields of of Europe mr. stone do
you have a follow-up question for the
governor yes governor we've been hearing
that the defense build-up that you would
associate yourself with would cost tens
of billions of dollars more than is now
contemplated and assuming that the
American people are ready to bear this
cost they nevertheless keep asking the
following question how do you reconcile
huge increases in military outlays with
your promise of substantial tax cuts and
of balancing the budget which in this
fiscal year when the just ended ran more
than sixty billion dollars in the red
mr. stone I have submitted an economic
plan that I've worked out in concert
with a number of fine economists in this
country all of whom approve it and
believe that over a five-year projection
this plan can permit the extra spending
for needed refurbishing of our defensive
posture that it can provide for a
balanced budget by 1983 if not earlier
and that we can't afford along with the
cuts that I have proposed in government
spending we can't afford the tax cuts I
have proposed and probably mainly
because mr. Carter's economic policy has
built into the next five years
and on beyond that a tax increase that
would be taking 86 billion dollars more
next year out of the people's pockets
than was taken this year and my tax cut
does not come close to eliminating that
86 billion dollar increase I'm only
reducing the amount of the increase in
other words what I'm talking about is
not putting government back to getting
less money than governments been getting
but simply cutting the increase the in
in spending the same question now goes
to President Carter President Carter
would you like to have the question
repeated yes President Carter the
question of war and peace a central
issue in this campaign you've been
criticized for in the give-and-take for
responding late to agressive Soviet
impulses for an insufficient buildup of
armed forces and a paralysis in dealing
with Afghanistan and Iran Governor
Reagan on the other hand has been
criticized for being all too quick to
advocate the use of lots of muscle
military action to deal with foreign
crises such as I mentioned specifically
what are the differences between the two
of you on the uses of American military
power
mr. stone I've had to make thousands of
decisions since I've been president
serving in the Oval Office and with each
one of those decisions that affect the
future of my country I have learned in
the process I think I'm a much wiser and
more experienced man than I was when I
debated for years ago against President
Ford I've also learned that they are no
simple answers to complicated questions
HL Mencken said that for every problem
there's a simple answer
it would be neat and plausible and wrong
the fact is that this nation in the
eight years before I became president
had its own military strength decrease
seven out of eight years the budget
commitments for defense went down 37% in
all since I've been in office we've had
a steady carefully planned methodical
but very effective increase in our
commitment for defense
but what we've done is to use that
enormous power and and prestige and
military strength of a United States to
preserve the peace we've not only kept
peace for our own country but we've been
able to extend the benefits of peace to
others in the Middle East we've worked
for a peace treaty between Israel and
Egypt successfully and have tied
ourselves together with Israel and Egypt
in a common defense capability this is a
very good step forward for our nation's
security and will continue to do as
we've done in the past I might also add
that there are decisions that are made
in the Oval Office by every president
which are profound in nature there are
always trouble spots in the world and
how those troubled areas are addressed
by a president alone in that Oval Office
affects our nation directly the
involvement of the United States and
also our American interests that is a
basic decision that has to be made so
frequently by every president who serves
that's what I've tried to do
successfully by keeping our country at
peace mr. stone do you have a follow-up
pause yes I would like to be a little
more specific on the use military power
and let's talk about one area for a
moment under what circumstances would
you use military forces to deal with for
example a shut off of Persian oil Gulf
if that should occur or to counter a
Russian expansion beyond Afghanistan
into either Iran or Pakistan I asked
this question in view of charges that we
are woefully unprepared to project
sustained and I emphasize the word
sustained power in that part of the
world Isis town in my State of the Union
address earlier this year I pointed out
that any threat to the stability or
security of the Persian Gulf would be a
threat to the security of our own
country in the past we've not had an
adequate military presence in that
region now we have two major carrier
task forces we have access to facilities
in five different areas of that region
and we've made it clear that working
with our allies and others that we are
prepared to address
any foreseeable DaVinci allottee which
by inter immerse with that crucial area
of the world but in doing this we have
made sure that we addressed this
question peacefully not injecting
American military forces into combat but
letting the strength of our nation be
felt in a beneficial way this I believe
has assured that our interest will be
protected in the Persian Gulf region as
we've done in the Middle East and
throughout the world governor Reagan you
have a minute to comment or rebut well
yes I questioned the figure about the
decline in defense spending under the
two previous administrations in the
preceding eight years to this
administration I would call to your
attention that we were in a war that
wound down during those eight years
which of course made a change in
military spending because of turning
from war to peace I also would like to
point out the Republican presidents in
those years faced with a Democratic
majority in both houses of the Congress
found that their requests for defense
budgets were very often cut now Gerald
Ford left a five-year projected plan for
a military buildup to restore our
defenses and President Carter's
administration reduced that by 38
percent cut 60 ships out of the Navy
building program that had been proposed
and stopped the b1 delayed the cruise
missiles stopped the production line for
the Minuteman missiles stopped the
Trident sir delayed the Trident
submarine and now is planning a mobile
military force that can be delivered to
various spots in the world which does
make me question his assaults on whether
I am the one that is quick to look for
use of force President Carter you have
the last word on this question well
there are various elements of Defense
some one is to control nuclear weapons
which I hope we'll get to later on
because that's the most important single
issue in this campaign another one is
how to address troubled areas of the
world
I think habitually governor Reagan has
advocated the injection of military
forces into troubled areas when I and my
predecessors both Democrats and
Republicans have advocated resolving
those troubles and
difficult areas of the world peacefully
diplomatically and through negotiation
in addition of that the buildup of
military forces is good for our country
because we've got to have military
strength in order to preserve the peace
but I'll always remember that the best
weapons are the ones that are never
fired in combat and the best soldier is
one who never has to lay his life down
on the field of battle strength is
imperative for peace but the two must go
hand in hand thank you gentlemen the
next question is from Harry Ellis to
President Carter
mr. president when you were elected in
1976 the consumer price index stood at
4.8% it now stands at more than 12%
perhaps more significantly the nation's
broader underlying inflation rate has
gone up from seven to nine percent now a
part of that was due to external factors
beyond US control notably
the more than doubling of oil prices by
OPEC last year because the United States
remains vulnerable to such external
shocks can inflation in fact be
controlled if so what measures would you
pursue in a second term again it's
important to put the situation into
perspective in 1974 we had a so called
oil shock wherein the price of OPEC oil
was raised to an extraordinary degree we
had an even worse old shock in 1979 in
1974 we had the worst recession the
deepest and most penetrating recession
since the Second World War the recession
that resulted this time was a briefest
we've had since the Second World War in
addition we've brought down inflation
early this year the first quarter we did
have a very severe inflation pressure
it's brought about by the OPEC price
increase average to about 18% the first
quarter this year the second quarter we
had dropped it down to about 13 percent
the most recent figures the last three
months of the third quarter of this year
the inflation rate is seven percent
still too high but it illustrates very
vividly that in addition to providing an
enormous number of jobs nine million new
jobs in the last three and a half years
that the inflationary threat is still
urgent on us
I noticed that governor Reagan recently
mentioned the reagan kemp roth proposal
which his own running mate
George Bush described as budu economics
and said that it would result in a 30%
inflation rate and Businessweek which is
not a democratic publication said that
this Reagan Kim proposal and I quote
them I think was completely
irresponsible and would result in
inflationary pressures which would
destroy this nation so our proposals are
very sound and very carefully considered
to stimulate jobs to improve the
industrial complex of this country to
create tools for American workers and at
the same time would be anti-inflationary
in nature so to add nine million new
jobs to control inflation and to plan
for the future was a energy policy now
intact as a foundation is our plan for
the years ahead mr. Ellis do you have a
follow up question from mr. Carter yes
mr. president
you have mentioned the creation of nine
million new jobs at the same time the
unemployment rate still hangs high as
does the inflation rate now I wonder can
you tell us what additional policies you
would pursue in a second administration
in order to try to bring down that
inflation rate and would it be an act of
leadership to tell the American people
they're going to have to sacrifice to
adopt a leaner lifestyle for some time
to come yes we have demanded that the
American people sacrifice and they've
done very well as a matter of fact we're
importing today about one-third less oil
from overseas than we did just a year
ago we've had a 25% reduction since the
first day I was in office at the same
time as I said earlier we have added
about nine million net new jobs in the
of time a record never before achieved
also the new energy policy has been
predicated on two factors one
conservation which requires sacrifice
and the other one increase in production
of American energy which is going along
very well more coal this year than ever
before in history more oil and gas wells
drilled this year than ever before in
history a new economic revitalization
program that we have in mind which will
be implemented next year
would result in tax credits which would
let business invest in new tools and new
factories to create even more new jobs
about a million in the next two years
and we also have planned a Youth
Employment Program which would encompass
six hundred thousand jobs for young
people this has already passed the House
now has an excellent prospect to pass
the Senate now the same question goes to
governor Reagan governor Reagan would
you like to have the question repeated
governor Reagan during the past four
years the Consumer Price Index has risen
from 4.8% to currently over 12% and
perhaps more significantly the nation's
broader underlying rate of inflation has
gone up from 7 to 9 percent now a part
of that has been due to external factors
beyond US control and notably the more
than doubling of OPEC oil prices last
year which leads me to ask you whether
since the United States remains
vulnerable to such external shops can
inflation in fact be controlled if so
specifically what measures would you
pursue mr. Ellis I think this idea that
has been spawned here in our country
that inflation somehow came upon us like
a plague and therefore it's
uncontrollable and no one can do
anything about it
is entirely spurious and it's dangerous
to say this to the people when mr.
Carter became president inflation was
4.8% as you said it had been cut in two
by President Gerald Ford it is now
running at twelve point seven percent
President Carter also has spoken of the
new jobs created well we always with the
normal growth in our country and
increase in population increased the
number of jobs but that can't hide the
that there are 8 million men and women
out of work in America today and 2
million of those lost their jobs in just
the last few months
mr. Carter had also promised that he
would not use unemployment as a tool to
fight against inflation and yet his 1980
economic message stated that we would
reduce productivity and gross national
product and increase unemployment in
order to get a handle on inflation
because of in January at the beginning
of the year it was more than 18%
since then he has blamed to the people
for inflation OPEC he's blamed the
Federal Reserve System
he has blamed the lack of productivity
the American people he has then accused
the people of living too well and that
we must share in scarcity we must
sacrifice and get used to doing with
less we don't have inflation because the
people are living too well we have
inflation because the government is
living too well and the last statement
just a few days ago was a speech to the
effect that we have inflation because
government revenues have not kept pace
with government spending I see my time
is running out here I'll have to get
this down very fast yes you can lick
inflation by increasing productivity and
by decreasing the cost of government to
the place that we have balanced budgets
and are no longer running grinding out
printing press money flooding the market
with it because the government is
spending more than it takes in and my
economic plan calls for that the
president's economic plan calls for
increasing the taxes to the point that
we finally take so much money away from
the people that we can balance the
budget in that way but we will have a
very poor nation and a very unsound
economy if we follow that path a
follow-up mr. Ellis yes you have
centered on cutting government spending
in what you have just said about your
own policies you have also said that you
would increase defense spending
specifically where would you cut
government spending if you were to
increase defense spending and also cut
taxes so that presumably federal
revenues would shrink well most people
when they think about cutting government
spending they think in terms of
eliminating necessary
programs or wiping out something some
service that government is supposed to
perform I believe that there is enough
extravagance in fact in government as a
matter of fact one of the secretaries of
hgw under mr. Carter testified that he
thought there was 7 billion dollars
worth of fraud and waste in welfare and
in the medical programs associated with
it we've had the General Accounting
Office estimate that there is probably
tens of billions of dollars that is lost
in fraud alone and they have added that
waste adds even more to that we have a
program for a gradual reduction of
government spending based on these
theories and I have a taskforce now that
has been working on where those cuts
could be made I'm confident that it can
be done and that it will reduce
inflation because I did it in California
and inflation went down below the
national average in California when we
returned money to the people and reduced
government spending President Carter
Governor Reagan's proposal the Riggin
Kim Roth proposal is one of the most
highly inflationary ideas that ever has
been presented to the American public he
would actually have to cut government
spending by at least a hundred and
thirty billion dollars in order to
balance of budget under this ridiculous
proposal I noticed that his task force
is working for his future plans had some
of their ideas revealed in the Wall
Street Journal this week one of those
ideas was to repeal the minimum wage and
several times this year governor Reagan
has said that the major cause of
unemployment is the minimum wage this is
a heartless kind of approach to the
working families of our country which is
typical of many Republican leaders in
the past but I think he's been
accentuated under governor Reagan in
California
I'm surprised governor Reagan brought
this up he had the three largest tax
increases in the history of that state
under his administration he more than
doubled state spending while he was
governor 122 percent increase and had
between a 20 and 30 percent increase in
the number of employees Saturday and
thank you sir it's governor Reagan has
the last word on this question yes the
figures that the president has just used
about California is a distortion of the
situation there because while I was
governor of California our spending in
California increased less per capita
than the spending in Georgia when mr.
Carter was governor of Georgia in the
same four years the size of government
increased only 1/6 in California of what
it increased in proportion to population
in Georgia and the idea that my tax cut
proposal is inflationary I would like to
ask the president why is it inflationary
to let the people keep more of their
money and spend it the way they'd like
and it isn't inflationary to let him
take that money and spend it the way he
wants I wish that question need not be
rhetorical but it must be because we run
out of time on that now the third
question to Governor Reagan from William
Hilliard yes governor Reagan the decline
of of our cities has been hastened by
the continual rise in crime strain race
relations the fall in the quality of
public education the persistence of
abnormal poverty in a rich nation and a
decline in the services to the public
the signs seem to point toward a
deterioration that could lead to the
establishment of a permanent underclass
in the cities what specifically would
you do in the next four years to reverse
this trend I have been talking to a
number of congressmen who have much the
same idea that I have and that is that
in the inner-city areas that in
cooperation with local government and
with national government and using tax
incentives and wouldn't cooperation with
the private sector but we have
development zones let the local entity
the city declare this particular area
based on the standards of the percentage
of people on welfare unemployed and so
forth in that area and then through tax
incentives induce the creation of
businesses providing jobs and so forth
in those areas
the elements of government through these
tax incentives for example a business
that would not have for a period of time
an increase in the property tax
reflecting its development of the unused
property that it was making wouldn't be
any loss to the city because the city
isn't getting any tax from that now and
it would simply be a delay and on the
other hand many of the people that would
then be given jobs are presently Ward's
of the government and it wouldn't hurt
to give them a tax incentive because
they that wouldn't be costing government
anything either I think there are things
to do in this regard I stood in the
South Bronx on the exact spot the
President Carter stood on in 1977 you
have to see it to believe it it looks
like a bombed out city great gaunt
skeletons of buildings windows smashed
out painted on one of them unkept
promises on another despair and this was
the spot at which President Carter had
promised that he was going to bring in a
vast program to rebuild this department
there a hole or this area there are
whole blocks of land that are left bare
just bulldoze down flat and nothing has
been done and they are now charging to
take tourists through there to see this
terrible desolation I talked to a man
just briefly there who asked me one
simple question do I have reason to hope
that I can someday take care of my
family again nothing has been done
follow-up mr. Hilliard yes governor
Reagan blacks and other non-whites are
increasing in numbers in our cities many
of them feel that they are facing a
hostility from whites that prevents them
from joining the economic mainstream of
our society there is racial
confrontation in the schools on jobs and
in housing is non-white seek to reap the
benefits of a free society what do you
think is the nation's future as a
multiracial society I believe in it I am
eternally optimistic and I happen to
believe that we've made great progress
from the days when I was young and when
this country didn't even know it had a
racial problem I know those things can
grow out of disc
in an inner city when there's
hopelessness that at home lack of work
and so forth but I believe that all of
us together and I believe the presidency
is what Teddy Roosevelt said it was it's
a bully pulpit and I think that
something can be done from there because
the goal for all of us should be that
one day things will be done neither
because of nor in spite of any of the
differences between us
ethnic differences or racial justice
differences whatever they may be that we
will have total equal opportunity for
all people and I would do everything I
could in my power to bring that about
mr. Hilliard would you repeat your
question for President Carter President
Carter the decline of our cities has
been hastened by the continual rise in
crime strain race relations the fall in
the quality of public education the
persistence of abnormal poverty and a
rich nation and a decline in services to
the public
the signs seem to point toward a
deterioration that could lead to the
establishment of a permanent underclass
in the cities what specifically would
you do in the next four years to reverse
this trend Thank You mr. you when I was
campaigning in 1976 everywhere I went
the mayors and local officials were in
despair about the rapidly deteriorating
central cities of our nation we
initiated a very fine urban renewal
program working with the mayors the
governors and other interested officials
this has been a very successful effort
that's one of the main reasons that
we've had such an increase in a number
of people employed all the nine million
people put to work in new jobs since
I've been in office 1.3 million of those
has been among black Americans and
another million among those who speak
Spanish we're now planning to continue
the revitalization program with
increased commitments of rapid transit
mass transit under the windfall profits
tax we expect to spend about forty three
billion dollars in the next ten years to
rebuild a transportation systems of our
country we also are pursuing
the housing programs we've had a 73%
increase and the allotment of federal
funds for improved education these are
the kinds of efforts worked on a joint
basis with community leaders
particularly in a minority areas of
essential cities that had been
deteriorating so rapidly in the past
it's very important to us that this be
done with the full involvement of
minority citizens I brought into that
level top levels of government into the
white house into administrative offices
of the executive branch in the into the
judicial system highly qualified black
and Spanish citizens and women who in
the past had been excluded
I noticed that Governor Reagan said it
when he was a young a man that there was
no knowledge of a racial problem in this
country those who suffered from
discrimination because of race or sex
certainly knew we had a racial problem
we have gone a long way toward
correcting these problems but we still
have a long way to go follow-up question
yes President Carter like to see repeat
the same follow-up to you blacks and
other non-whites are increasing in
numbers in our cities many didn't feel
that they are facing a hostility from
whites that prevents them from joining
the economic mainstream of our society
there is racial confrontation in the
schools on jobs and in housing is
non-white seek to reap the benefits of a
free society what is your assessment of
the nation's as a future in multiracial
society ours is a nation of refugees a
nation of immigrants
almost all of our citizens came here
from other lands and now have hopes
which are being realized for a better
life preserving their ethnic commitments
they are family structures their
religious beliefs preserving their
relationships with their relatives in
foreign countries but still forming
themselves together in a very coherent
society which gives our nation and
strength in the past those minority
groups have often been excluded from
participation in the affairs of
government since I've been president
I've appointed for instance
more than twice as many black federal
judges as all previous presidents in the
history of this country I've done the
same thing in the appointment of women's
and also spanish-speaking Americans to
involve them in administration of
government and a feeling that they
belong to the societal structure that
makes decisions in the judiciary and an
executive branch is a very important
commitment which I am trying to realize
and continue to do so in the future
governor Reagan you have a minute for
rebuttal yes the president talks of
government programs and they have their
place but as governor when I was at that
end of the line and receiving some of
these grants for government programs I
saw that so many of them were dead end
they were public employment for these
people who really want to get out into
the private job market where there are
jobs with a future now the president
spoke a moment ago about that I was
against the minimum wage I wish he could
have been with me when I sat with a
group of teenagers who were black and
who were telling me about their
unemployment problems and that it was
the minimum wage that had done away with
the jobs that they once could get and
indeed every time it has increased you
will find that there was an increase in
minority unemployment among young people
and therefore I have been in favor of a
separate minimum for them with regard to
the great progress that has been made
with this government spending the rate
of black unemployment in Detroit
Michigan is 56 percent President Carter
you have the last word on this question
well it's obvious that we still have a
long way to go in fully incorporating
the minority groups into the mainstream
of American life we have made good
progress and there's no doubt in my mind
that a commitment to unemployment
compensation the minimum wage welfare
national health insurance those kinds of
commitments that have typify the
Democratic Party since ancient history
in this country's political life are a
very important element of the future in
all those elements Governor Reagan has
repeatedly spoken out against them which
to me shows a very great insensitivity
to giving deprived families
a better chance in life this to me is a
very important difference between him
and me in this election and I believe
the American people will judge
accordingly there is no doubt in my mind
that in the downtown central cities with
the with a new commitment on an energy
policy with a chance to revitalize homes
and to make them more fuel efficient
with a chance for synthetic synthetic
fuels program solar power this will give
us an additional opportunity for jobs
which will pay rich dividends thank you
gentlemen
now for the fourth question to President
Carter from Barbara Walters mr.
president the eyes of the country
tonight are on the hostages in Iran I
realize this is a sensitive area but the
question of how we respond to acts of
terrorism goes beyond this current
crisis other countries have policies
that determine how they will respond
Israel for example considers hostages
like soldiers and will not negotiate
with terrorists
for the future mr. president the country
has the right to know do you have a
policy for dealing with terrorism
wherever it might happen and what have
we learned from this experience in Iran
that might cause us to do things
differently if this was something
similar happens again probably one of
the blights on this world is a threat
and the activities of terrorists at one
of the recent economic summit
conferences between myself and the other
leaders of the Western world we
committed ourselves to take strong
action against terrorism airplane
hijacking was one of the elements of
that commitment there is no doubt that
we have seen in recent years in recent
months additional acts of violence
against Jews in France and of course
against those who live in Israel by the
PLO and other terrorist organizations
ultimately the most serious terrorist
threat is if one of those radical
nations who believe in terrorism in a
policy should have atomic weapons both I
and all my predecessors have had a deep
commitment to controlling the
proliferation
of nuclear weapons in countries like
Libya or Iraq we have even ignited some
of our closest trade partners because we
have insisted upon the control of the
spread of nuclear weapons to those
potentially terrorist countries when
Governor Reagan has been asked about
then he makes a very disturbing comment
that non-proliferation or the control of
the spread of nuclear weapons is none of
our business and when he was asked
specifically recently about Iraq he said
there's nothing we can do about it this
ultimate terrorist threat is the most
fearsome of all and it's part of a
pattern where our country must stand
firm to control terrorism of all kinds
ms walters follow-up yes while we are
discussing policy head Iran not taken
American hostages I assume that in order
to preserve our neutrality we would have
stopped the flow of spare parts and
vital war materials once war broke out
between Iraq and Iran now we are free to
lift the ban on such Goods if they let
our people come home doesn't this reward
terrorism compromise our neutrality and
possibly antagonize nations now friendly
to us in the Middle East we will
maintain our position of neutrality in
the Iran and Iraq war we have no plans
to sell additional material or goods to
Iran that might be of a warlike nature
when I made my decision to stop all
trade with Iran as a result of a taking
of our hostages I announced then and
have consistently maintained since then
that if the hostages are released safely
that we would make delivery on those
items which Iran owns which they have
bought and paid for also that the frozen
Iranian assets would be released that's
been a consistent policy one I intend to
carry out but you repeat the question
now for governor Reagan please miss
Walters yes governor the eyes of the
country tonight remain on the hostages
in Iran but the question of how we
respond to acts of terrorism goes beyond
this car
crisis there are other countries that
have policies that determine how they
will respond Israel for example
considers hostages like soldiers and
will not negotiate with terrorists for
the future the country has the right to
know do you have a policy for dealing
with terrorism wherever it might happen
and what have we learned from this
experience in Iran that might cause us
to do things differently if this was
something similar should happen again
Barbara you've asked that question twice
I think you ought to have at least one
answer to it I am I have been accused of
lately of having a secret plan with
regard to the hostages now this comes
from an answer that I've made at least
50 times during this campaign to the
press which is that the question would
be have you any ideas of what you would
do if you were there and I said well yes
and I think that anyone that's seeking
this position as well as other people
probably have thought to themselves what
about this what about that these are
just ideas of what I would think of if I
were in that position and had access to
the information in which I would know
all the options that were open to me I
have never answered the question
however second the one that says well
tell me what are some of those ideas
first of all I would be fearful that I
might say something that was presently
underway or in negotiations and thus
expose it and endanger the hostages and
sometimes I think some of my ideas might
involve quiet diplomacy where you don't
say in advance or say to anyone what it
is you're thinking of doing your
question is difficult to answer because
in the situation right now no one wants
to say anything that would inadvertently
delay in any way the return of those
hostages if they're if there is a chance
of their coming home soon or that might
cause them harm what I do think should
be done once they are safely here with
their families and that tragedy is over
and we've endured this humiliation for
just lacking one week of a year now then
I think it is time for us to have a
complete investigation as to the
diplomatic efforts that were made in the
beginning
why they have been there so long and
when they come home what did we have to
do in order to bring that about what
arrangements were made and I would
suggest that Congress should hold such
an investigation in the meantime I'm
going to continue praying that they'll
come home
follow-up question I would like to say
that neither candidate answered
specifically the question of a specific
policy for dealing with terrorism but I
will ask governor Reagan and different
follow-up question
you've had suggested that there would be
no Iranian crisis had you been president
because we would have given firmer
support to the Shah but Iran is a
country of 37 million people who are
resisting a government they regarded as
dictatorial my question is not whether
the Shahs busy regime was preferable to
the ayatollahs but whether the United
States has the power or the right to try
to determine what form of government any
country will have and do we back
unpopular regimes whose major merit is
that they are friendly to the United
States the degree of unpopularity of a
regime when the choice is total
authoritarianism totalitarianism I
should say in the alternative government
makes one wonder whether you are being
helpful to the people and we've been
guilty of that because someone didn't
meet exactly our standards of Human
Rights even though they were an ally of
ours instead of trying patiently to
persuade them to change their ways we
have in a number of instances aided a
revolutionary overthrow which results in
complete totalitarianism instead for
those people and I think that this is a
kind of a hypocritical policy when at
the same time we're maintaining a date
on with the one nation in the world
where there are no human rights at all
the Soviet Union now there was a second
phase in the Iranian affair in which we
had something to do with that and that
was we had adequate warning that there
was a threat to our embassy and we could
have done what other embassies did
either strengthen our security there or
remove our personnel before the kidnap
and the takeover took place the other
day I'm sorry I must interrupt President
Carter you have a minute
rebuttal I didn't hear any comment from
governor Reagan about what he would do
to stop or to reduce terrorism in the
future what the Western Allies did
decide to do is to stop all air flights
commercial air flights to any nation
involved in terrorism or the hijacking
of airplanes of the harboring of
hijackers secondly we all committed
ourselves as have all my predecessors in
the Oval Office not to permit the spread
of nuclear weapons to a terrorist nation
or to any other nation that does not
presently have those weapons or
capabilities for explosives third not to
make any sales of material or weapons to
a nation which is involved in terrorist
activities and lastly not to deal with
the PLO until and unless the PLO
recognizes Israel's right to exist and
recognizes UN resolution 242 as a basis
for Middle East peace these are a few of
the things to which our nation is
committed and we will continue with
these commitments Governor Reagan you
have the last word on that question yes
I have no quarrel whatsoever with the
things that have been done because I
believe it is high time that the
civilized countries of the world made it
plain that there is no loom worldwide
for terrorism there will be no
negotiation with terrorists of any kind
and while I have a last word here I
would like to correct a misstatement
effect by the president's I have never
made the statement that he suggested
about nuclear proliferation and nuclear
proliferation or the trying to halt it
would be a major part of a foreign
policy of mine thank you gentlemen
that is the first half of the debate now
the rules for the second half quite
simple they're only complicated when I
explain them the second half the
panelists with me will have no follow up
questions instead after the panelists
have asked a question the candidates
have answered each of the candidates
will have two opportunities to follow up
to question to rebut or just to comment
on his opponents statement governor
Reagan will respond in this section to
the first question from Marvin stone
governor Reagan
control the president said it was the
single most important issue both of you
will have expressed the desire to end
the nuclear arms race with Russia but by
methods that are vastly different you
suggest that we scrapped the salt 2
treaty already negotiated and intensify
the build-up of American power in to
induce the Soviets to sign a new treaty
one more favorable to us yes President
Carter on the other hand says he will
again a try to convince a reluctant
Congress to ratify the present treaty
and the grounds it's the best we can
hope to get now both of you cannot be
right will you tell us why you think you
are yes I think I'm right because I
believe that we must have a consistent
foreign policy a strong America and a
strong economy and then as we build up
our national security to restore our
margin of safety we at the same time try
to restrain the Soviet build-up which
has been going forward at a rapid pace
and for quite some time the salt 2
treaty was the result of negotiations
and mr. Carter's team entered into after
he had asked the Soviet Union for a
discussion of actual reduction of
nuclear strategic weapons and his
emissary I think came home in 12 hours
with having heard a very definite net
but taking that one note from the Soviet
Union we then went back into
negotiations on their terms because
mister Carter had canceled the b-1
bomber delayed the MX delayed the
Trident submarine delayed the cruise
missile shut down the missile man the
three the Minuteman missile production
line and whatever other things that that
might have been done the Soviet Union
sat at the table knowing that we had
gone forward with unilateral consider
our concessions without any
reciprocation from them whatsoever now I
have not blocked the salt ii treaty as
mr. Carter mr. Mondale suggests that I
have it has been blocked by a Senate in
which there is a Democratic majority
indeed the Senate Armed Services
Committee voted 10 to 0 with 7
abstentions
against the salt 2 treaty and declared
that it was not in the national security
interests of the United States besides
which it is illegal because the law of
the land passed by Congress says we
cannot accept a treaty in which we are
not equal and we're not equal in this
treaty for one reason alone
our b-52 bombers are considered to be
strategic weapons their backfire bombers
are not the governor I have to interrupt
you at that point the time's up for that
but the same question now to President
Carter yes President Carter both of you
have expressed the desire to end the
nuclear arms wave race with Russia but
through vastly different methods the
governor suggest we scrap the salt 2
treaty which you negotiated in Vienna
are signed in Vienna and intensify the
build-up of American power to induce the
Soviets to sign a new treaty one more
favorable to us you on the other hand
say you will again try to convince a
reluctant Congress to ratify the present
treaty on the grounds it is the best we
can hope to get from the Russians
you cannot both be right will you tell
us why you think you are yes I'd be glad
to inflation unemployment the cities all
very important issues but they pale into
insignificance in the life and duties of
a president when compared with the
control of nuclear weapons every
president who has served in the Oval
Office since Harry Truman has been
dedicated to the proposition of
controlling nuclear weapons to negotiate
with the Soviet Union balanced
controlled observable and then reducing
levels of atomic weaponry there is a
disturbing pattern in the attitude of
Governor Reagan he has never supported
any of those arms control agreements
the limited test ban salt one nor that
the the anti-ballistic missile treaty no
the blood of off stock treaty negotiated
with the Soviet Union by President Ford
and now he wants to throw into the
wastebasket a treaty to control nuclear
weapons on a balanced and equal basis
between ourselves in the Soviet Union
negotiated over a seven-year period by
myself and my two Republican
predecessors the Senate has not voted
yet on the strategic arms limitation
treaty there have been preliminary
skirmishing x' in the Committees of the
Senate but the treaty has never come to
the floor of the Senate for either a
debate or a vote it's understandable
that a senator in the preliminary debate
can make an irresponsible statement or
maybe an ill-advised statement you've
got 99 other senators to correct that
mistake if it is a mistake but when a
man who hopes to be president says take
this treaty discard it do not vote do
not debate do not explore the issues do
not finally capitalize on this law
negotiation that is a very dangerous and
disturbing thing governor Reagan you
have an opportunity to rebut that yes
I'd like to respond very much first of
all the Soviet Union if I have been
critical of some of the previous
agreements is because we've been out
negotiated for quite a long time and
they have managed in spite of all of our
attempts at arms limitation to to go
forward with the biggest military
buildup in the history of man now to
suggest that because two Republican
presidents tried to pass the salt Trudy
treaty that puts them on its side I
would like to say a president Ford who
was within ninety percent of Anna tree a
treaty that we could be in agreement
with when he left office is emphatically
against this salt treaty I would like to
point out also that senators like n
rejection and Hollings of South Carolina
they are taking the lead in the fight
against this particular treaty I am NOT
talking of scrapping I am talking of
taking the treaty back and going back
into negotiations and I would say to the
Soviet Union we will sit and negotiate
with you as long as it takes to have not
only legitimate arms limitation but to
have a reduction of these nuclear
weapons to the point that neither one of
us represents a threat to the other that
is hardly throwing away a treaty and
being opposed to arms limitation
President Carter yes governor Reagan is
making some very misleading and
disturbing statements he not only
advocates the scrapping of his treaty
and I don't know that these men as he
quotes or against the treaty in his
final form but he also advocates the
possibility he said it's been a missing
element of playing a trump card against
the Soviet Union of a nuclear arms race
and insisting upon nuclear superiority
by our own nation as a predication for
negotiation in the future with the
Soviet Union if President Brezhnev said
we will scrap this treaty negotiated
under three American presidents over a
seven-year period of time we insist upon
nuclear superiority as a basis for
future negotiations and we believe that
the launching of a nuclear arms race is
a good basis for future negotiations
it's obvious that I as president and all
Americans would reject such a
proposition this would mean the
resumption of a very dangerous nuclear
arms race it would be very disturbing to
American people it would change the
basic tone and commitment that our
nation has experienced ever since the
Second World War with all presidents
Democratic and Republican and would also
be very disturbing to our allies all of
whom support this nuclear arms treaty in
addition of that the adversarial
relationship between ourselves and the
Soviet Union would undoubtedly terior
eight very rapidly this attitude is
extremely dangerous and belligerent in
his tone although it's said with a quiet
voice governor Reagan and other
supposed to be replying to me but
sometimes I have a hard time in
connecting what he's saying and with
what I have said or what my positions
are sometimes think like the witch
doctor that gets mad when a good doctor
comes along with a cure that'll work the
my point I have made already mr.
president with regard to negotiating it
does not call for nuclear superiority on
the part of the United States it is
calls for a mutual reduction of these
weapons as I say to the point that
neither of us can represent a threat to
the other and to suggest that the salt
to treaty that your negotiators
negotiated was just a continuation and
based on all of the preceding efforts by
two previous presidents is just not true
it was a new negotiation because as I
say President Ford was within about 10%
of having a solution that could be
acceptable and I think our allies would
be very happy to go along with a fair
and verifiable assault agreement
President Carter you have the last word
on this question I think to close out
this discussion it would be better to
put into perspective what we're talking
about I had a discussion with my
daughter Amy the other day before I came
here to ask her what the most important
issue was she said she thought nuclear
weaponry city and the control of nuclear
arms this is a formidable force some of
these weapons have 10 megatons of
explosion if you put 50 tons of TNT in
each one of railroad cars you would have
a car load of TNT a trainload of TNT
stretching across this nation that's one
major war explosion in a warhead we have
thousands equivalent of Megaton or
million tons of TNT warheads the control
of these weapons is the single major
responsibility of a president and to
cast down this commitment of all
presidents
because of some slight technicalities it
can be corrected is a very dangerous
approach we have to go to another
question now from Harry Ellis to
President Carter mr. president as you
have said Americans through conservation
are importing much less oil today than
we were even a year ago yet u.s.
dependence on Arab oil as a percentage
of total imports is today much higher
than it was at the time of the 1973 Arab
oil embargo and for some time to come
the loss of substantial amounts of Arab
oil could plunge the u.s. into
depression now this means that a bridge
must be built out of this dependence can
the United States develop synthetic
fuels and other alternative energy
sources without damage to the
environment and will this process mean
steadily higher fuel bills for American
families I don't think is it in doubt
that in the future the cost of oil is
going to go up what I've had is a basic
commitment since I've been as president
is to reduce our dependence on foreign
oil it can only be done in two ways
one to conserve energy to stop the waste
of energy and secondly to produce more
American energy we've been very
successful in both cases we've now
reduced the importing of foreign oil in
the last year alone by one-third we
imported today two million barrels of
oil less than we did the same day just a
year ago this commitment has been
opening up a very bright Vista for our
nation in the future because with the
windfall profits tax as a base we now
have an opportunity to use American
technology an American ability an
American natural resources to expand
rapidly the production of synthetic
fuels yes to expand rapidly the
production of solar energy yes and also
to produce a conventional kinds of
American energy we will drill more oil
and gas wells this year than any year in
history will produce more coal this year
than any year and
we were exporting more coal this year
than any year in history and we have an
opportunity now with improved
transportation systems improved loading
facilities in our ports to see a very
good opportunity on a world
international market to replace OPEC oil
with American coal as a basic energy
source this exciting future will not
only give us more energy security but
will also open up vast opportunities for
Americans to live a better life and to
have millions of new jobs associated
with this new and very dynamic industry
now in prospect because of a new energy
policy that we've put into effect would
you repeat the question now for governor
Reagan governor Reagan Americans through
conservation are importing much less oil
today than we were even a year ago and
yet us reliance on Arab oil as a
percentage of total imports is much
higher today than it was during the 1973
Arab oil embargo and the substantial
loss of Arab oil could plunge the United
States into depression the question is
whether the development of alternative
energy sources in order to reduce this
dependence can be done without damaging
the environment and will it mean for
American families steadily higher fuel
bills I'm not so sure that it means
steadily higher fuel costs but I do
believe that this nation has been
portrayed for too long a time to the
people as being energy poor when it is
energy rich the coal that the president
mentioned yes we have it and yet
one-eighth of our total coal resources
is not being utilized at all right now
the mines are closed down there are
22,000 miners out of work most of this
is due to regulations which either
interfere with the mining of it or
prevent the burning of it with our
modern technology yes we can burn our
coal within the limits of the Clean Air
Act I think as technology improves we'll
be able to do even better with that the
other thing is that we have only leased
out and begun to explore too
scent of our outer continental shelf for
oil where it is believed by everyone
familiar with that fuel and that source
of energy that there are vast supplies
yet to be found our government has in
the last year or so taken out of
multiple use millions of acres of public
lands that once were neither were public
lands subject to multiple use
exploration for minerals and so forth it
is believed that probably 70% of the
potential oil in the United States is
probably hidden in those lands and no
one is allowed to even go and explore to
find out if it is there this is
particularly true of the recent efforts
to shut down part of Alaska nuclear
power
there were 36 power plants planned in
this country
and let me add the word safety it must
be done with the utmost of safety but 32
of those have given up and canceled
their plans to build and again because
government regulations and permits and
so forth take make it take more than
twice as long to build a nuclear plant
in the United States as it does to build
one in Japan or in Western Europe we
have the sources here we are energy rich
and coal is one of the great potentials
we have President Carter your comment
yes sir
to repeat myself we have this year the
opportunity which will realize to
produce 800 million tons of coal an
unequaled record in the history of our
country governor Reagan says that this
is not a good achievement and he blames
restraints on coal production on
regulations regulations that affect the
life and the health and safety of miners
and also regulations that protect the
purity of our air and the quality of our
water and our land we cannot cast aside
those regulations we have a chance in
the next 15 years insisting upon the
health and safety of workers in the
mines and also preserving the same high
and water pollution standards to triple
the amount of coal we produce Governor
Reagan's approach to our energy policy
which has already proven its
effectiveness is to repeal or to change
substantially the windfall profits tax
to return a major portion of 227 billion
dollars back to the oil companies to do
away with the Department of Energy to
short-circuit our synthetic fuels
program to put a minimal mm emphasis on
solar power to emphasize strongly
nuclear power plants as a major source
of energy in the future he wants to put
all our eggs in one basket and give that
basket to the major oil companies
Governor Reagan that is a misstatement
of course of my position I just happen
to believe that free enterprise can do a
better job producing the things that
people need then government can the
Department of Energy has a multi-billion
dollar budget in excess of ten billion
dollars it hasn't produced a quart of
oil or a lump of coal or anything else
in the line of energy and for the mr.
Carter to suggest that I want to do away
with the safety laws and with the laws
that pertain to clean water and clean
air and so forth as governor of
California I took charge of passing the
strictest air pollution laws in the
United States the strictest air quality
law that has ever been adopted in the
United States and we created an OSHA an
Occupational Safety and Health Agency
for the protection of employees before
the federal government had one in place
and to this day not one of its decisions
or rulings has ever been challenged so I
think some of those charges are missing
the point I am suggesting that there are
literally thousands of unnecessary
regulations that invade every facet of
business and indeed very much of our
personal lives that are unnecessary that
government can do without that it added
130 billion dollars to the cost of
production in this country and that are
contributing their part to inflation and
I would like to see us a little more
free as we once were
Carter another crack at that sure as a
matter of fact the air pollution
standard laws that were passed in
California were passed over the
objections of Governor Reagan and this
is a very well-known fact also recently
when someone suggested that the
Occupational Safety and Health Act
should be abolished Governor Reagan
responded Amen the offshore drilling
rights is a question that governor
Reagan raises often as a matter of fact
in the proposal for the Alaska Lands
legislation a hundred percent of all the
offshore lands would be open for
exploration and 95 percent of all the
Alaska lands where it is suspected or
believed that mineral minerals might
exist we have with our five-year plan
for the leasing of offshore lands
proposed more land to be drilled then
has been opened up for drilling since
this program first started in 1954 so we
are not putting restraints on America
and exploration we're encouraging it in
every way we can
governor Reagan you have the last word
on this question yes if it is a
well-known fact that I opposed air
pollution laws in California the only
thing I can possibly think of is that
the President must be suggesting the law
that the federal government tried to
impose on the state of California not a
law regulations that would have made it
impossible to drive an automobile within
the city limits of any California city
or have a place to put it if you did
drive it against their regulations it
would have destroyed the economy of
California and I must say we had the
support of Congress when we pointed out
how ridiculous this attempt was by the
Environmental Protection Agency we still
have the strictest air control or air
pollution laws in the country as for
offshore oil in only 2% now is so leased
and is producing oil the the rest as to
whether the open the lands are going to
be opened
five years or so we're already five
years behind in what we should be doing
there is more oil now in the wells that
have been drilled than has been taken
out in the hundred and twenty years one
years that they've been drilled Thank
You governor
Thank You mr. president the next
question goes to governor Reagan from
William Hilliard governor Reagan wage
earners in this country especially the
young are supporting a social security
system that continues to affect their
income drastically the system is
fostering a struggle between the young
and the old and is drifting the country
toward a polarization of these two
groups how much longer can the young
wage earner expect to bear the
ever-increasing burden of the Social
Security system the Social Security
system was based on a false premise with
regard to how fast the number of workers
would increase and how fast the number
of retirees would increase it is
actually out of balance and this first
became evidence about 16 years ago and
some of us were voicing warnings then
now it is trillions of dollars out of
balance and the only answer that has
come so far is the biggest single tax
increase in our nation's history the
payroll tax increase for Social Security
which will only put a bandaid on this
and postpone the day of reckoning by a
few years at most what is needed is a
study that I have proposed by a task
force to look of experts to look into
this entire problem as to how it can be
reformed and made actuarially sound but
with the premise that no one presently
depended on Social Security is going to
have the rug pulled out from under them
and not get their check we cannot
frighten as we have with the threats and
the campaign rhetoric that is going on
in this campaign our senior citizens
leave them thinking that in some way
they're endangered and they would have
no place to turn they must continue to
get those checks and I believe that the
system can be put on a sound actuarial
basis but it's going to take some study
and some work and not just passing a tax
increase to let the load or the roof
fall in on the next administration would
you repeat that
for President Carter yes President
Carter wage earners in this country
especially the young are supporting a
social security system that continues to
affect their income drastically the
system is fostering a struggle between
young and old and is drifting the
country toward a polarization of these
two groups how much longer can the young
wage earner expect to bear the
ever-increasing burden of the Social
Security system as long as as a
Democratic president in the White House
we will have a strong and viable Social
Security system free of the threat of
bankruptcy although Governor Reagan has
changed his position lately on four
different occasions he has advocated
making Social Security a voluntary
system which would in effect very
quickly bankrupt it I noticed also in
The Wall Street Journal earlier this
week that a preliminary report of his
task force advocates making Social
Security's more sound by reducing the
adjustments in Social Security for the
retired people to compensate for the
impact of inflation these kinds of
approaches are very dangerous to the
security and the well-being and a peace
of mind of the retired people of this
country and those approaching retirement
age but no matter what it takes in the
future to keep Social Security sound it
must be kept that way and although there
was a serious threat to the Social
Security system and its integrity during
the 1976 campaign and when I became
president the action of a Democratic
Congress working with me has been to put
Social Security back on a sound
financial basis that's a way it will
stay governor Reagan well that just
isn't true it is I said delayed the
actuarial imbalance falling on us for
just a few years with that increase in
taxes and I don't believe we can go on
increasing the tax because the problem
for the young people today is that
they're paying in far more than they can
ever expect to get out now again this
statement that somehow I wanted to
destroy it and I just changed my tune
but I was for voluntary Social Security
which would mean the ruin of it
mr. president the voluntary thing that I
suggested many years ago was that a
young man orphaned and raised by an aunt
who died his aunt was ineligible for
Social Security insurance because she
was not his mother and I suggested that
if this is an insurance program
certainly the person who's paying in
should be able to name his own
beneficiaries and that's the closest
I've ever come to anything voluntary
with Social Security I too AM pledged to
a Social Security program that will
reassure these senior citizens of ours
they're going to continue to get their
money there are some changes I'd like to
make I would like to make a change that
discriminates in the regulations against
a wife who works and finds that she then
is faced with a choice between her
father or her husband's benefits if he
dies first or what she is paid in but it
does not recognize that she has also
been paying in herself and she is
entitled to more and she presently can
get I'd like to change that President
Carter's rebuttal now thank these
constant suggestions that the basic
Social Security system should be changed
does cause concern and consternation
among the ages of our country it's
obvious that we should have a commitment
to them that Social Security benefits
should not be taxed and that there would
be no peremptory change in the standards
by which Social Security payments are
made to the retired people we also need
to continue to index the Social Security
payments so that if inflation Rises the
Social Security payments would rise a
commensurate degree to let the buying
power of the Social Security check
continue intact in the past the
relationship between Social Security and
Medicare has been very important to
provide some modicum of aid for senior
citizens in the retention of health
benefits Governor Reagan as a matter of
fact began his political career
campaigning around this nation against
Medicare now we have an opportunity
to move toward national health insurance
with an emphasis on the prevention of
disease an emphasis on outpatient care
not in patient care an emphasis on
Hospital cost containment to hold down
the cost of hospital care for those who
are ill and emphasis own catastrophic
health insurance so that if a family is
threatened with being wiped out
economically because the very of a very
high medical bill then the insurance
would help pay for it these are the kind
of elements of a national health
insurance important to the American
people governor Reagan again typically
is against such a proposal governor now
you go again when I opposed Medicare
there was another piece of legislation
meeting the same problem before the
Congress I happened to favor the other
piece of legislation and thought that it
would be better for the senior citizens
and provide better care than the one
that was finally passed I was not
opposing the principle of providing care
for them I was opposing one piece of
legislation as versus another there is
something else about Social Security of
course that doesn't come out of the
payroll tax it comes out of the general
fund that something should be done about
I think it's disgraceful that the
disability insurance fund in Social
Security finds checks going every month
to tens of thousands of people who are
locked up in our institutions for crime
or from mental illness and they are
receiving disability checks from Social
Security every month while a state
institution provides for all of their
needs in their care President Carter you
have the last word on this question I
think there's debate on Social Security
Medicare national health insurance
typifies as vividly as any other subject
tonight the basic historical differences
between the Democratic Party and the
Republican Party the allusions to basic
changes in the minimum wage is another
and the deleterious comments that the
governor Reagan has made about
unemployment compensation these
commitments that the Democratic Party
has historically made to the working
families of this nation
have been extremely important to the
growth in their stature and in a better
quality of life for them
I noticed recently that Governor Reagan
frequently quotes Democratic presidents
in his acceptance address in other words
I have never heard a candidate for
president who is a Republican quote a
Republican president but when they get
an office they try to govern like
Republicans so it's good for the
American people to remember there is a
sharp basic historical difference
between governor Reagan and me on these
crucial issues also between the two
parties that we represent Thank You mr.
president governor Reagan we now go to
another question question to President
Carter by Barbara Walters thank you you
have addressed some of the major issues
tonight but the biggest issue in the
minds of American voters is yourselves
your ability to lead this country when
many voters go into that booth just a
week from today they will be voting
their gut instinct about you men you've
already given us your reasons why people
should vote for you now would you please
tell us for this your final question why
they should not vote for your opponent
why his presidency could be harmful to
the nation and having examined both your
opponent's record and the man himself
tell us his greatest weakness
Robert reluctant as i understanding
critical about governor Reagan I'll try
to answer your question first of all is
a historical perspective that I've just
described this is a contest between a
Democrat in the mainstream of my party
as exemplified by the actions that I've
taken in the Oval Office the last four
years as contrasted with Governor Reagan
who in most cases does typify his party
but in some cases there is a radical
departure by him from the heritage of
Eisenhower and others the most important
crucial difference in this election
campaign in my judgment is the approach
to the control of nuclear weaponry and
the inclination to control or not to
control the spread of atomic weapons
to other nations that don't present I
have it predicted the terrorist Nations
the inclination that Governor Reagan has
exemplified in many troubled times since
he's been running for president I think
since 1968 to inject the American
military forces in places like North
Korea to put a blockade around Cuba this
year or in some instances to project
American forces into a fishing dispute
against the small nation of Ecuador on
the west coast of South America this is
typical of his long-standing inclination
on the use of American power not to
resolve disputes diplomatically and
peacefully but to show that the exercise
of military power is best proven by the
actual use of it obviously no president
wants war and I certainly did not
believe the Governor Reagan if he were
president would walk war but a president
in the Oval Office has to make a
judgment on almost a daily basis about
how to exercise the enormous power of
our country for peace through diplomacy
or in a careless way in a belligerent
attitude which has exemplified his
attitudes in the past Barbara would you
repeat the question for Governor Reagan
yes thank you realizing that you may be
equally reluctant to speak ill of your
opponent may I ask why people should not
vote for your opponent why his
presidency could be harmful to the
nation and having examined both your
opponent's record and the man himself
could you tell us his greatest weakness
Oh Barbara I believe that there is a
fundamental difference and I think it
has been evident and most of the answers
that mr. Carter's given tonight that he
seeks the solution to anything as
another opportunity for a federal
government program I happen to believe
that the federal government has usurped
powers and autonomy autonomy and
authority that belongs back at the state
and local level it has imposed on the
individual freedoms of the people and
that there are more of the
things that could be solved by the
people themselves if they were given a
chance or by the levels of government
that were closer to them now as to why I
should be and he shouldn't be when he
was a candidate in 1976 President Carter
invented a thing he called the misery
index he added the rate of unemployment
and the rate of inflation and it came at
that time to 12.5 under President Ford
and he said that no man with that size
misery index had a right to seek
re-election to the presidency today by
his own decision leave misery index is
an excess of 20% and I think this must
suggest something but when I have quoted
a Democrat president as the president
says I was a Democrat
I said many foolish things back in those
days but the president that I quoted had
made a promise a Democrat promise and I
quoted him because it was never kept and
today you would find that that promise
is at the very heart of what
republicanism represents in this country
today and that's why I believe they're
going to be millions of Democrats that
are going to vote with us this time
around because they too want that
promise kept it was a promise for less
government and less taxes and more
freedom for the people President Carter
yes I mentioned the radical departure of
governor Reagan from the principles or
ideals or historical perspective of his
own party I don't think this can be
better Illustrated than in the case with
guaranteeing women equal rights under
the Constitution of our nation for 40
years the Republican Party platforms
called for guaranteeing women equal
rights with a constitutional amendment
six predecessors of mine who served in
the Oval Office call for this guarantee
of women's rights Governor Reagan and
the new Republican Party has departed
from this commitment a very severe blow
to the opportunity for women fine
- correct discrimination under which
they have suffered when a man and a
woman do the same amount of work a man
gets paid a dollar a woman only gets
paid 59 cents and the Equal Rights
Amendment only says that equality of
rights shall not be abridged for women
by the federal government or by the
state government that's all it says
a simple guarantee of equality of
opportunity which typifies the
Democratic Party and which is a very
important commitment of mind as
contrasted with Governor Reagan's
radical departure from the long-standing
policies of his own party governor
Reagan yes mr. president once again I
happen to be against the amendment
because I think the amendment will take
this problem out of the hands of elected
legislators and put it in the hands of
unelected judges I am for equal rights
and while you have been in office for
four years and not one single state and
most of them have a majority of
Democratic legislators has added to the
ratification or voted to ratify the
Equal Rights Amendment while I was
governor more than eight years ago I
found 14 separate instances where women
were discriminated against in the body
of California law and I had passed and
signed into law 14 statutes that
eliminated those discriminations
including the economic ones that you
have just mentioned equal pay and so
forth I believe that if when all these
years that we've spent trying to get the
amendment that we'd spent as much time
correcting these laws as we did in
California and we were the first to do
it if I were president I would also now
take a look at the hundreds of federal
regulations which discriminate against
women and which go right on while
everyone is looking for an amendment I
would have someone ride herd in those
regulations and we'd start eliminating
those discriminations in the federal
government against women President
Carter yes Howard I'm a southerner and I
share the basic beliefs of my region
about an excessive government intrusion
into the private affairs of American
citizens and also into the private
affairs of the free enterprise system
one of the commitments that I made was
to deregulate the major industries of
this country we've been remarkably
successful with the help of the
Democratic Congress we've deregulated
the air industry the rail industry the
trucking industry financial institutions
now working on the communications
industry in addition to that I believe
this element of discrimination is
something that the south has seen so
vividly as a blight on our region of the
country which has now been corrected not
only racial discrimination but
discrimination against people that have
to work for a living because we have
been trying to pick ourselves up by our
bootstraps since the long depression
years and lead a full and useful life in
the affairs of this country we've made
remarkable success it's part of my
consciousness and my commitment to
continue this progress so my heritage as
a southerner my experience in the Oval
Office convinces me that what I've just
described is a proper course for the
future governor Reagan yours is the last
word well my last word is again to say
that this we were talking about this
very simple amendment and women's rights
and I make it a plain again I am for
women's rights but I would like to call
the attention of the people of the fact
that that's so-called simple amendment
could be used by mischievous men to
destroy discriminations that properly
belong by law to women respecting the
physical differences between the two
sexes labor laws that protect them
against doing things that would be
physically harmful to them those would
all could all be challenged by men and
the same would be true with regard to
combat service in the military and so
forth I thought there was a subject we
were supposed to be on but if we're
talking about how much we think about
the working people and so forth I'm the
only fella that ever ran for this job
who was six times president of his own
Union and still has a lifetime
membership in that Union gentlemen each
of you now have three minutes for a
closing statement President Carter
you'll first first of all I'd like to
thank a legal League of Women Voters for
making this debate possible I think it's
been a very constructive debate and I
hope it's helped to
acquaint the American people with the
short differences between myself and
governor Reagan also I want to thank the
people of Cleveland and Ohio for being
such hospitable hosts during this last
few hours in my life I've been present
now for almost four years I've had to
make thousands of decisions and each one
of those decisions has been a learning
process I've seen the strength of my
nation and I've seen the crises that it
approached in a tentative way and I've
had to deal with those crises as best I
could as I've studied the record between
myself and governor Reagan I've been
impressed with the stark differences
that exist between us I think the result
of this debate indicate that that fact
is true I consider myself in the
mainstream of my party I consider myself
in the means mainstream even of the
bipartisan list of presidents who served
before me the United States must be a
nation strong the United States must be
a nation secure we must have a society
that's just unfair and we must extend
the benefits of our own commitment to
peace to create a peaceful world I
believe that since I've been in office
there have been six or eight areas of
combat Evolved in other parts of the
world in each case I alone have had to
determine the interest of my country and
the degree of involvement of my country
I've done that with moderation with care
with thoughtfulness sometimes consulting
experts but I've learned in this last
three-and-a-half years that when an
issue is extremely difficult when the
call is very close the chances are the
experts will be divided almost 50/50 and
the final judgement about the future of
a nation war peace involvement reticence
thoughtfulness care consideration
concern has to be made by the men in the
Oval Office
it's a lonely job but with the
involvement of the American people in
the process with an open government
the job is a very gratifying one the
American people now facing next Tuesday
a lonely decision those listening to my
voice will have to make a judgment about
the future of this country and I think
they ought to remember that one vote can
make a lot of difference if one vote per
precinct had changed in 1960 John
Kennedy would never have been president
of his nation and if a few more people
had gone to the polls and voted in 1968
Hubert Humphrey would have been
president Richard Nixon would not there
is a partnership involved and our nation
to stay strong to stay at peace to raise
how the banner of human rights to set an
example for the rest of the world to let
our deep beliefs and commitments be felt
by others in all the nations is my plan
for the future I ask the American people
to join me in this partnership Governor
Reagan as I would like to add my words
of thanks too to the ladies of the of
the League of Women Voters making these
debates possible I'm sorry that we
couldn't persuade the bringing in of the
third candidate so that he could have
been seen also in these debates but
still it's good that at least once all
three of us were heard by the people of
this country next Tuesday is election
day
next Tuesday all of you will go to the
polls who stand there in the polling
place and make a decision I think when
you make that decision it might be well
if you would ask yourself are you better
off than you were four years ago
is it easier for you to go and buy
things in the stores than it was four
years ago
is there more or less unemployment in
the country than there was four years
ago is America as respected throughout
the world as it was do you feel that our
security is as safe that we're as strong
as we were four years ago and if you
answer all of those questions yes why
then I think your choice is very obvious
to who you will vote for if you don't
agree if you don't think that this
course that we've been on for the last
four years is what you would like to see
us fall over the neck
for then I could suggest another choice
that you have this country doesn't have
to be in the shape that it is in we do
not have to go down go on sharing and
scarcity with the country getting worse
off with unemployment growing we talk
about the unemployment lines if all of
the unemployed today were in a single
line allowing two feet for each one of
them that line would reach from New York
City to Los Angeles California all of
this can be cured and all of it can be
solved I have not had the experience
that the president has had in holding
that office but I think in being
governor of California the most populous
state in the Union if it were a nation
it would be the seventh ranking economic
power in the world I too had some lonely
moments and decisions to make I know
that the economic program that I have
proposed for this nation in the next few
years can resolve many of the problems
that trouble us today I know because we
did it there we cut the cost the
increased cost of government the
increase in half over the eight years we
returned 5.7 billion dollars in tax
rebates credits and cuts to our people
we as I've said earlier fell below the
national average in inflation when we
did that and I know that we did give
back authority and autonomy to the
people I would like to have a crusade
today and I would like to lead that
crusade with your help and it would be
one to take government off the backs of
the great people of this country and
turn you loose again to do those things
that I know you can do so well because
you did them and made this country great
thank you gentlemen ladies and gentlemen
for 60 years the League of Women Voters
has been committed to citizen education
and effective participation of Americans
in governmental and political affairs
the most critical element of all in that
process is an informed citizen who goes
to the polls and who votes on behalf of
the League of Women Voters now
I would like to thank President Carter
and governor Reagan
you